In this lesson we will learn how to create a page layout using CSX or in other words we will learn how
to position elements to sit side by side one another to give the appearance of columns.
Up until now in this course we've seen elements sit below and above one another taking up the entire
available width of the browser window.
Well then this lesson we will learn how to take control and give specific with the elements and have
them sit side by side.
That's going to be a lot of fun.
So let's get started.
Here we are in our text editor and this is an example page we're viewing.
We can see that it has nothing more than a header and footer.
So if we view this in the web browser we can see that there is no main meat and potato body content
in between the header and footer.
So let's add that now together.
So our goal for this lesson is to create two sections that sit side by side giving the appearance of
columns.
So first we'll create a div and give it a class of main area then we'll create another element using
the A side element and give it a class of sidebar.
Now let's add a bit of space filler text to both of these elements paragraphs.
This is the main area or call them and then include a bit of space filler text and then we'll also do
that in the sidebar element.
This is the sidebar.
OK so if we save and refresh we can see that our Web page now has a bit of content.
We are now ready to begin writing bits of CSSA code to style the page.
The first thing that I want to customize about the page is the overall wit.
So currently all of the content is filling the entire browser window with this is a problem because
the human eye only prefers to read so many words per line.
So in order to avoid eye fatigue for our site visitors we need to add some sort of maximum wit to our
overall content.
Now there are many ways of achieving this but I'll show you my favorite way of doing it.
I'm going to create a div with a class of container and I'm going to move all of our content inside
it.
So I'm copying cutting and then I'm going to paste.
So now everything lives inside this one parent ancestor container element.
Now in our C Ss Let's target that element dot container and I'm going to say maximum width max width
940 pixels.
So if I save and refresh we can see that there is a cutoff.
Now instead of filling the full window it cuts off right where my mouse cursor is.
However wouldn't it be nice if this width was horizontally centered in the browser window.
It's very easy to achieve that we can say margin left.
Auto.
Margin right.
We know that the margin property controls the space around elements.
And if we assign a value of auto to both directions horizontally it will be centered moving on.
The next thing that I want to achieve is I want to wrap are two sections that we want to be columns
in some sort of parent element so that content begins here and ends here.
So I'm going to create a new div named content area and then I want to move r to content sections main
area in sidebar.
I want to cut and paste those to live within the newly created content area div.
Next I want to style content area to have borders above and below it so interstices will target content
area order top three pixels solid black border bottom three pixels solid black.
So if we refresh can see that the borders have been applied.
All that remains now is to position these two sections.
This and this to sit side by side one another instead of stacking on top of each other we will begin
by targeting or selecting this section with our C Ss so that section's name is main area.
It has a class of main area and we're going to give it a width so it will say only take up 66 percent
of the available width so we can see that our width property is being observed.
But the two sections are still not sitting side by side so we will now use a property named flow and
we will tell the main area to float to the left we can see a few interesting things taking place.
We can see that the main content or the main column is now floated to the left and you can see the beginnings
of it to come lay out.
However it's not perfect because the sidebar as we can see is trying to wrap itself around the floated
content.
So let's add a little bit additional text to the side bar so you can really see the effect that I'm
trying to describe.
See how the sidebar is trying to wrap around the main column.
We don't want that we want two distinct columns.
Now this layout that we currently see is hinting at the true nature of the float property.
So we used float left.
Now when you hear the word float I want you to think of the print world.
So a newspaper or magazine.
Typically you'll see images floated to the left or the right and the main text of the article wraps
itself around the image.
Well that's exactly what's going on in our lives currently.
If you imagine this was an image instead of the main column you can see that it's floated to the side
and the other content around it is aware of it and is trying to wrap around it.
So in order to create two fully distinct columns where there's no sort of wrapping around we simply
need to float the sidebar element as well.
So Will targeted with our CSS.
It has a class of sidebar.
We'll give it a width of 34 percent and will also float it to the left.
If we refresh can see that we now have two distinct columns.
Now you may be wondering why we chose these values.
We will circle back around to that in just a couple of minutes.
But for now we have bigger fish to fry.
You will recall that we had added a wrapper div for our two columns.
So main area and side bar both live within this parent div of content area not up until just a moment
ago this content area parent div had a top and bottom border.
What you'll is that as soon as we set things up so that both sections were floated It's as if the parent
element is not aware that it has any child content whatsoever.
This is because parent elements are only aware of child content that is not floated.
So for example if we create a paragraph directly within content area Hello World and refresh we will
see that the content area div respects and is aware of this content we can see it's trying to draw a
border above and below it.
Now all we want is for the content area parent div to be aware of it to flow to children as well.
This bottom border should be sitting down here where my mouse is.
Now we do not want a hello world paragraph's will remove that.
And we're back to the drawing board.
So how can we get this rapper or parent div to be aware of the floated children.
We can clear our floats.
So after the code for our two columns main area and sidebar but still within the content area parent
div will create a new element div and will given a class of fix.
So now we have something that we can target in our CSSA that sit below the floated elements in our CSSA
will create a class that targets that clear.
We use the clear property.
Now we can say left or right depending on the type of floats we use.
But a good catch all is to simply use the phrase both.
So now if we refresh we can see that we're in luck.
So essentially this new div that we added with a class of fix that sits below the floated elements is
waving its arms in the air and it's saying hey parent element content area look at me.
I exist.
I am clearing the floats.
And because the element sits below the floated elements the parent element is then aware of all of the
child content.
However it's not considered a best practice to have HMO code that is completely meaningless.
So this is an empty div.
It has no content within it.
So that means it truly has no purpose other than to make our layout work.
So while this technically gets the job done it's far from ideal.
So let's delete this and instead I'll show you a strategy that most web developers use the parent element
content area.
We will add a second utility class to it so we'll add a class of group.
Yes you can assign multiple classes to a single element by simply including a space.
So we're going to create a utility class named group.
When I say utility I simply mean that we can reuse this anywhere on our page where we have a parent
or container element with floated children and we need that parent element to be self-sufficient.
We needed to be able to automatically clear its own floated children.
So this method is referred to as the clear fix method and it's the weapon of choice for most web developers
.
Now the clear fix method is not something that you need to memorize.
It's something that you copy and paste.
So I'm literally just going to paste in some code.
So essentially all of these selectors are targeting the group class and then adding an empty bit of
content before and after it and then there clearing it and then we have this rule for older legacy versions
of Internet Explorer so that our floats are cleared in every browser and every device under the sun
.
This code is completely bulletproof.
I use it in all of my web sites and you can find it in the course materials so you can paste it into
your websites.
Now that we have this in place you can use the group class anywhere in your HMO.
So if we save and refresh we can see that even though we no longer have any sort of element beneath
the columns because we added this group class the parent element will automatically clear its floated
children.
Now this lesson is almost complete.
But before we end it I want to address some of the most commonly asked questions about layouts and floats
.
So the first question is how or why did I choose these values for the two columns.
Sixty six and thirty four percent.
The reason I chose these with values is because I wanted to lay out where the main column used two thirds
of the available width and the sidebar used.
One third of the available width from a C S s perspective I really just wanted these two values to add
up to 100 percent because I wanted to make use of all of the available width but you don't have to follow
this rule of thirds instead.
What if you wanted the two columns to be equal and with you could simply each give them 50 percent of
the width.
Typically we want our columns to add up to 100 percent but they don't have to.
So I could set this to 40 40 plus 50 only equals 90.
And if I were fresh you can see we're only using about 90 percent of the available width.
So there are no rules to creating layouts.
You can have your columns take up as much space as you prefer.
Another common question is why are we using percentage values for width instead of pixel values.
The answer is that it's a matter of preference.
There's no right or wrong choice.
So if we want to use pixel values instead of percentage values we would need to first ask ourselves
How large is the container.
So how much available space do we have at our disposal so to remember that the overall container for
the entire page was given a maximum width of 940 pixels.
So we most likely want our column widths to add up to nine forty.
So we could give the main column A with of six hundred and forty pixels and we can give the sidebar
with the 300 pixels.
And visually This is identical to the layout we saw when we used 66 percent and 34 percent.
Now if you do prefer to use pixel values for the width of your columns make sure that the container
element that they're sitting in does not use Macs with for its own wit but instead have it used simply
with.
Now at this point in the course please do not begin worrying about creating a one size fits all beautiful
Responsive Web site that is completely outside the scope of this lesson and what we're trying to focus
on at the moment in future lessons we will learn about responsive web design and how to create different
layouts at different screen sizes.
But for now let's get used to creating floating columns and dealing with values.
And rest assured that learning how to create more flexible layouts will come later on in the course
.
Let's move on to the final frequently asked question before we close out this lesson.
And that question is why would we bother creating a reusable class that lets parents auto clear their
children instead of just structuring our page in a way where we could rely on the footer to use the
clear property to clear the floats.
That's an excellent question.
In a perfect world we could set up web pages where there's always a conveniently located element beneath
the floats that clears the floats.
But in the real world that is simply not the case.
When you begin creating Web lets you will quickly realize that you need your content to be self-contained
modules.
You need to move bits of content around throughout the page and you need them to clear themselves.
You can't always rely on the element beneath it to take care of clearing it.
No the more you begin experimenting creating layouts the more you will find that having a reusable utility
class declaring the child floats is a true lifesaver.
Now we've covered a lot in this lesson.
Here is a very quick review to have sections of a web page sit side by side one another.
Or in other words to create columns.
We add the float property to an element and we also assign it a with value.
If you're using floats to create call them layouts you need to be sure to clear your floats and we learn
several different ways of doing that.
And finally we learned about different ways of managing our with values.
Now this was a fairly technical lesson to have something didn't make sense and if it feels like a lot
of information to absorb at once that's absolutely OK.
Again these are topics that we will relearn and continue to revisit throughout the course.
I'll see you in the next lesson.